%!TEX root=cs112S2014-lab6.tex 
% mainfile: cs112S2014-lab6.tex 

\input{labspre.tex}

\usepackage[compact]{titlesec}

\begin{document} \MYTITLE{Laboratory Assignment Six: Evaluating the Performance of Sorting Algorithms}
\MYHEADERS{Laboratory Assignment Six}{Due: March 25, 2014}

\section*{Introduction}

Sorting algorithms are commonly used in a wide variety of practical computer applications.  In this laboratory
assignment, we will learn more about sorting while also continuing to familiarize ourselves with the empirical analysis
of algorithms.  In particular, we will analyze the performance of five sorting algorithms as they are applied to
randomly generated input data sets.  Students who would like to learn more about sorting algorithms are encouraged to
visit the following Web site: \url{https://www.cs.usfca.edu/~galles/visualization/ComparisonSort.html}.

\section*{Accessing and Using the Sorting Benchmarking Framework}

To start this laboratory assignment, you should return to the {\tt cs112S2014-share} Git repository and type the {\tt
git pull} command in the terminal window.  Now, you should have a {\tt lab6/} directory that you can explore further.
Once again, please make sure that you can find the source code in this new directory and you understand why the
directories in the assignment are structured the way that they are. Now, you should use GVim to study the source code in
the {\tt build.xml} file.  As in the past assignments, when editing a Java program you can type the command {\tt :make}
in your GVim window and it will compile the all of the Java classes and save the bytecode in the correct subdirectories
inside of the {\tt bin/} directory.  Please see the instructor if you cannot get this to work.

\section*{Adding Features to Support Experimentation}

As you study the provided source code, you will notice that it contains several sorting algorithms (e.g., {\tt
  BubbleSort}) and a {\tt SortingExperiment} class that facilitates experimentation. Currently, the {\tt
  SortingExperiment} class provides methods that generate random arrays of {\tt int}s, calls the appropriate sorting
routines, and outputs all of the results.  By default, the benchmarking framework runs each sorting algorithm five times
and reports the average time needed to run the algorithms.

Currently, the {\tt SortingExperiment} is hard-coded to sort {\tt int} arrays of size ten. Furthermore, the current
values of the configuration variables cause it to run a specified algorithm for five trials.  While the {\tt verbose}
parameter is currently a command-line argument, the other variables (e.g., {\tt numExperiments} and {\tt
  experimentSize}) are not.  As such, you should add a complete set of command-line arguments that will make it easier
to conduct experiments with sorting algorithms. What command-line arguments would best support experimentation with 
the \mbox{sorting algorithms}?

\section*{Conducting Experiments to Evaluate Efficiency}

Before you start running experiments to evaluate the efficiency of the different sorting algorithms, you should run the
{\tt SortingExperiment} and make sure that each algorithm works correctly.  What is the command line that you will need
to type to run the sorting experiment? How can you tell that the sorting algorithms are working correctly? Once you are
convinced that the algorithms sort correctly, you should study the source code of each algorithm in order to form a
hypotheses about their performance.  What algorithm will be the fastest? Which one will be the slowest? How did you
arrive at these conclusions? You intuitively answer these questions by looking at the way in which the algorithms use
iteration constructs and conditional logic. For instance, you can look at the way in which the {\tt bubbleSort} method
in the {\tt BubbleSort.java} file uses a {\tt while} loop, a {\tt for} loop, and an {\tt if} statement. Is {\tt
  bubbleSort} likely to be fast or slow? How do you know?  

\section*{Summary of the Required Deliverables}

  This assignment invites you to submit a signed and printed version of the following deliverables: 

  \begin{enumerate} 
  \itemsep0pt
  \item Using diagram(s), an explanation of how recursion works in the Java programming language

  \item A short discussion of the different primitive types that are available in the Java language

  \item The final version of the commented source code for your Fibonacci benchmarking framework

  \item A comprehensive written report that fully explains the results of your experimental study

  \item A reflective commentary on the challenges that you faced when conducting the experiments
   
  \end{enumerate}

  Along with turning in a printed version of these deliverables, you should ensure that everything is also available in
  the repository that is named according to the convention {\tt cs112S2014-<your user name>}. Please note that students
  in the class are responsible for completing and submitting their own version of this assignment.    While it is
  acceptable for members of this class to have high-level conversations, you should not share source code or full
  command lines with your classmates.  Deliverables that are nearly identical to the work of others will be taken as
  evidence of violating the \mbox{Honor Code}.  Please see the instructor if you have questions about the policies for
  this assignment.

  \end{document}
